[Music] Good day I'm Norman Wildberger and welcome
to 2016 in today's video we're going to be looking
at some fundamental counting problems that are
very essential in modern combinatorics and they're
really associated with these four types of data
structures that we've been talking about in the
last few videos lists ordered sets multi sets
and sets and each one of these can be thought
of in terms of two numbers n and K so we talk
about K lists from n or k ordered sets from n
k multi sets from n and just K sets from n and
in each of those cases we can ask how many of
each of them are there it's question of counting
so these are almost surely the four most basic
counting problems in mathematics or at least
certainly in combinatorics So today we're going
to address those and there's some rather familiar
answers but perhaps some unfamiliar ones too so
our first counting problem is to understand how
many lists there are which are K lists from n so
while list NK is for us a type so we refer to
a data structure having this particular type
we are still going to use this somewhat familiar
notation for the size or in other words the number
of objects which actually have this type so at
this point this is not a set but we are going to
use the same kind of uh notation and here's the
basic formula that we want to establish that the
number of lists which are from n and have size
K is n to the K so I remind you that n here is
a natural number 1 2 3 4 5 and so on and K can
be also a natural number or possibly zero as
well this is a very easy counting problem because
a list is such a concrete easy to understand kind
of object so here's a typical list here's a
list with K objects L1 L2 up to LK and each
of these is a natural number somewhere between
one and N because we're assuming we have a list
from n so it means that all the entries are
within the range one to n and they're ordered
so there's a first one there's a second one
all the way up to a k one so how many of them
are there well it's a very simple uh situation
because there are n possibilities for the L1
L1 could be 1 2 all the way up to n they're
exactly n possibilities and similarly there are
exactly nend possibilities for L2 and similarly
there are exactly nend possibilities for all of
the L's including l k because repetitions are
allowed these various choices are completely
independent so there's n possibilities
here n possibilities here all the way up
to n possibilities here and so the total number
of possibilities is n * n * n so all the way up
to times n where there are in fact K of these
n's multiplying together because there are K
entries in our list and that's why we have n to
the K as the number of such lists okay good so
our next counting problem is to count ordered
sets we're talking about K ordered sets from
n and the formula is that the number of O set
nks is equal to n to the K falling we're using
here kth's notation that we talked about in
math foundations 55 when we were talking about
the binomial theorem and binomial coefficients
so Donald kth introduced the uh very pleasant
uh kind of efficient way of talking about what
happens when you multiply an N by n + 1 by n+
2 and so on and Al together K such increasing
things multiplied together that was n k rising
and if we start with n and we multiply then n
minus1 and n minus 2 so all the successively
lower ones K terms all together then we have n
to the K falling so this is n * n -1 * N - 2 all
the way to nus k + 1 and that ensures that there
are allog together K terms being multiplied there
so it's this one here that's involved in the
formula so in fact it's very similar to the
number of lists except that instead of being n to
the K it's n to the K falling and the reason is
not very hard I remind you that an ordered set
looks something like this so here's a k set it
has K elements it has these braces here that
tells us that repetitions are not allowed but
otherwise the entries can just as before or be
any natural numbers from 1 to n but there's an
order this is the first one the second one
and so on so it's just like a list except
that repetitions are not allowed so if we want
to count how many there are it's not too hard
because there are n possibilities for this first
one and then as opposed to a list there are no
longer n possibilities for the second one because
repetitions are not allowed so whichever one that
we've chosen for L1 L2 has to be different from
that one leaving only n minus one possible choices
for L2 and then L3 there will only be n minus
2 choices for it because we can't repeat the
L1 or the L2 value so at each stage the number
of options decreases by one so we're picking up
exactly uh falling power in the sense of K and
there are going to be altogether K such terms
in this product because there are K choices to
be made so n * N - 1 * n - 2 all the way down to
N - k + 1 that's exactly this thing here n to
the K falling it's the number of ordered sets
from n with K elements or if you like the number
of ko sets from n also a very fundamental counting
formula for our next one we're going to skip ahead
to the set case so we're going to count the number
of sets from n with exactly K elements or
the number of sets that you can make using
the numbers 1 through n and choosing exactly
K elements the answer is the familiar binomial
coefficient n choose K written usually with these
brackets and we've talked about those kinds of
numbers and their role in that math foundations 55
video and the ones around it I remind you that the
binomial coefficient n choose K can be written
in terms of the factorial as n factorial over K
factorial * nus K factorial and I remind you that
K factorial is just K * K -1 * K - 2 all the way
down to * 1 in fact that's also a falling power
it's K to the K falling because we're starting
with k and then there are exactly k terms in
this product so we could rewrite this binomial
coefficient as a quotient of two falling Powers
the N factorial Over N minus K factorial that's
what you get when you have n * n minus1 all the
way down to the one above that which is n minus
k + 1 well that's exactly what we called n to the
K falling our previous slide so this divided by
this is n to the K falling and then there's
a k factorial or a k to the K falling in the
denominator okay so how can we see this familiar
formula well one way is to connect it to what
we've just done with o sets because there's an
intimate connection between sets and ordered
sets if we have a set like this this and it's a k
set from n so it has K elements and each of these
elements is a number between one and N but the
elements here are unordered if we want to make an
ordered set from this we can do that in exactly
K factorial ways because we can order these K
elements in exactly K factorial ways we can choose
a first one in K ways and then a second one in K
minus one way and then third one and K minus
two ways and so on so a k set s like this can
be ordered in K factorial ways that means that
there's a relationship between the number of O
sets of size K from n and the number of sets of
size K from n if we take a set of size K from n
and multiply it by K factori we're getting all
the K factorial possible ordered sets that can
be created from that original unordered set so
it follows that the number of ordered sets is
K factorial time the number of sets and we know
what this is because we just found that in our
previous slide that was n to the K falling
and so it follows that set and K the number
of sets size K from n is going to be this n
to the K falling divided by the K factorial
it's exactly what we have here the N to the K
following that's the number of O sets size K
from n and this K to the K falling otherwise
known as K factorial is just coming from
here so again the very familiar kind of thing
and if you played around with the binomial
theorem or you remember the discussion around math
foundations 54 55 and so on this will be uh very
familiar to you so these three are relatively
simple the fourth one is considerably trickier
and less wellknown the problem of how to count
multi sets Okay so now we turn our attention to
this problem the trickiest of the problem is to
count the number of M sets from n of size K so
uh km set from n has the form like this you have
square brackets denoting the fact that repetitions
are allowed but there are no commas now telling
us that we can rearrange things and things don't
matter so it's an unordered object so here is
M there's K objects because we're assuming we
have a km set and all of these are numbers from 1
to n and very possibly there could be repetitions
how many of these are there well to count that
let's remind ourselves that we had an alternate
way of expressing or writing down an M set maybe
we call that the multiplicity form for m at some
point and here is the alternate way of writing
such an M set we use the fact that we can add
M sets and that we can multiply M sets by numbers
to represent multiplicities so we can write it as
M1 * the M set 1 plus M2 * the M set 2 all the
way up to MN * the M Set n what we're doing here
is we're simply counting in this multiset the
number of ones and that's M1 so M1 is just the
multiplicity of one M2 is the multiplicity of two
in here count how many twos there are we count how
many threes there are and so on up to the number
n and count how many n's there are and that's M
subn so another way of asking the
question is how many such expressions
are there where what do we know about
the M's well the M's are Multiplicity
so they have to be natural numbers or possibly
zero it's very important to remember that zero
is allowed as a multiplicity it's not necessarily
the case that all of these are going to appear and
generally they don't okay so the multiplicities
Mi are all positive when I say positive I mean
greater than or equal to zero and in fact
they're all less than or equal to K because
we're assuming that there's K objects in this
m set all together so clearly any one of them
can only occur at most K times and the other thing
that we know about the M's is that if we add them
all up well that's the total number of objects in
the M set which is the size of the M set which is
K these conditions then are another way of
thinking about what the problem is we're trying
to find out how many solutions to finding M1 M2 up
to MN where they sum to K and they're all positive
in fact this condition that they're all less than
or equal to K is really not entirely needed it's
true but it's not really needed once we know that
they're all positive then this condition will
guarantee that none of them is bigger than than K
so we don't actually need this condition we could
just think about having condition that we have
looking for positive M's that satisfy that their
sum is equal to K we want to know how many such
Solutions are there now there's a rather clever
argument here now if you've taken a discrete
mathematics course or combinatorics course you
will have seen this argument because it's a very
fundamental one but many of you will not have
seen that so it's probably better to start with a
special case and if we're looking for some pattern
or some formula and it's maybe a little bit tricky
we don't know what to do looking at special cases
where we can work things out see what the pattern
is is a very good way to start so let's have a
look at something like M set 53 actually fits in
with what we've been using as example quite a lot
when n is five so what do M sets 53 look like well
we're talking about three M sets from five so all
the elements have to be numbers 1 2 3 4 5 those
are the possibilities for the entries and there
have to be three entries alog together and order
doesn't matter and repetitions are allowed so here
is a three M set from five 111 here's another
one 112 here's another one 113 114 115 122 123
and so on there's quite a few of them there
would be another one 2 4 four and we could
list them all we want to know for example how
many are there just of this kind so let's have
a look at the question in this particular case so
in this situation we're looking at an M set where
the objects are one of these numbers 1 through
5 so we can write this m set as some number of
ones plus some number of twos plus some number
of Threes plus some number of fours plus some
number of fives and these multiplicities have
to add up to three because altogether there
have to be exactly three elements in our M
set and we've said that we can think about
the inequalities just that they're all positive
or greater than or equal to zero okay so how are
we going to count how many solutions there are
to essentially this pair of equations okay so
now there's a little bit of a trick here which is
to employ some kind of physical representation of
these various M sets and what we're going to do
is we're going to take these five multiplicities
and arrange them in order separated by lines so
these lines that we're drawing here are sort of
like dividers that separates the m1's from the
m2s from the M3s from the m4s from the m5s and
if we're looking at a particular M set like
this one it has one two and two fours we're
going to represent that in this diagram by making
some circles so we're going to make three circles
one for each one of these entries so there's a
two so we're going to put a circle in the Box
labeled M2 and there are two fours so we're going
to put two circles in the sort of box labeled M4
so notice that these four dividers actually give
us five regions there's the M1 region before the
first divider then there's M2 and then there's M3
and then there's M4 and then there's M5 after the
last divider so to get the five regions we need
for dividers that's going to be an important point
so this is a way of associating to a particular
mset of the kind that we're interested in a
particular configuration of circles and lines in
fact this configuration has exactly three circles
representing the three entries and four lines
representing the divisions or the separators
between these five different multiplicities
that we're interested in so I want to do uh
some more examples like that to let you see what
what's going on here okay so let's look at this
m set 115 what pattern of circles and lines
corresponds to it well there's are four lines
which separate the regions into these five
boxes each one correspond to a multiplicity
multiplicity of 1 2 3 4 5 so over here we have
two ones so we're going to put two circles in
the M1 box the first box there are no twos so
that's going to be empty there are no threes
there are no fours and there's a single five
that goes there so this pattern of circles and
dividers represents this if we didn't have this
and we just looked here we'd see ah there's two
ones no twos no 3's no fours and one five okay how
about 2 3 4 there's zero 1es there's a two there's
a three there's a four 155 there's a single
one there's no twos no threes no fours and two
fives let's go the other way around so here
we have a situation we have four dividers and
three circles what M set does that correspond
to well we read off how many ones are there
there's zero ones there's 0 twos there's two
threes okay so we have to put two threes and
no fours and one five so it corresponds to the m
set 335 how about this one line line line circle
circle circle line well there's 0 1's 02s 03s
three fours okay so there's three fours and of
course no fives so it corresponds to the m set
444 and what about this one here circle circle
line line circle line line that corresponds to
well there's two ones there's no twos there's a
three no fours and no [Applause] fives so I hope
you can see that this way every M set from five
with exactly three elements corresponds to a
picture like this that has exactly four lines and
exactly three circles and the actual positions of
the lines and circles are arbitrary I mean the the
lines are all in order but the relative positions
of the circles could be anywhere before the lines
after the lines are interspersed around so if we
want to count M set another way of doing it is to
count the number of these geometrical patterns
of circles and lines and that's actually um not
too hard to do so any multiset M from five size
three corresponds to a pattern of three circles
and 5 - 1 dividers or lines and these can be
in any order there's no restriction on the
relative positions of these three circles and four
dividers as long as they're all just in an order
well we can count that because that's really
the situation where we have seven objects Al
together because there's four lines and
three circles and we have to choose three
of those seven to be circles so consider this
one here for example right there's Al together
1 2 3 4 5 6 seven objects there are always seven
objects and this one is specified by the circles
being the 1 2 3 the fourth the fifth and the
sixth here the three circles are the first the
second and the fifth of these 1 2 3 4 5 six seven
objects alt together there are seven choose
three such patterns of circles and lines and
7even choose three is a binomial coefficient one
way of saying it is that it's 7 to the 3 falling
over 3 factorial that's a very efficient way of
calculating it so it's 7 * 6 * 5 there's the 7 to
the 3 Falling divided by the 3 factorial 3 * 2 *
1 then a bit of cancellation the 3 * 2 and the six
cancel and we just get 35 so there are in fact 35
M sets from five with exactly three elements and
if you're not sure you could write them all down
and count them and make sure that that actually
is the case Okay so if we've absorb this specific
argument the general case is really not too much
different here is the formula for the number of KM
sets from n it's also a binomial coefficient but
it's formed from the n and the K in somewhat
more complicated way it's n + kus1 choose
K and the reason is because what we're
counting is the number of solutions to
the equation M1 + M2 plus all the way up to
MN equals K we're assuming that there are
n possible numbers that can be ingredients so
the multiplicities go from the multiplicity
of one all the way up to multiplicity of
N and we've said that they're going to
be K objects in this m set Al together so
the total number of multiplicities have to
add up to K and they all have to be positive
greater than or equal to zero so the number
of solutions to this well it's the same as
the number of ways of in K circles and nus1
dividers these n multiplicities can be
represented by these sort of n positions
that are obtained with these n minus one dividers
and then we have to choose K circles interspersed
amongst those n minus1 dividers so altogether
there are then n -1 + K or n plus kus1 objects
in our diagram for n minus one dividers and
K circles and from those we have to choose K
circles so Al together we have n + K minus1 choose
K that's the number of M sets from n of size k
that's a very important counting problem
and sort of closes the circle on the sort
of Elementary data structures and Counting
how many objects there are in each one of
them so very good we now want to go a little bit
further though because now we've got these four
types of data structures very nice we'd like to
be able to make a little bit more sophisticated
objects we want to be able to combine these
things we want to consider LT whose elements are
not necessarily just natural numbers but maybe
whose elements are themselves sets or perhaps
ordered sets or perhaps multi- sets you can see
now there's going to be a lot more combinations
and possibilities and things are going to become
more complicated so we want to enlarge our view
by having more data structures still starting from
these four basic types and combining them in more
elaborate ways I hope you'll join me for that I'm
Norman wildberger thanks for listening [Music]